# Set up WAL archiving

## What's WAL?
PostgreSQL uses a well-known and very popular technique to guarantee
transactional integrity, called *Write Ahead Logging* (WAL).
Although a complete description of how WAL works is beyond the scope of this
tutorial, in short it means that any write operation is first recorded in a
journal file, which is later used when the server executes a checkpoint to
synchronize the data in the actual tablespaces on disk. In case of a server
crash, the data modified after the last checkpoint may be recovered from the
journal by replaying the "logged ahead" writes.

In practice, the journal is split over a finite number of segments - normally
stored in the `pg_xlog` subdirectory of PGDATA - that are automatically
rotated and recycled by the server.  Each segment is normally 16MB in size
and their number is determined by the values of a few configuration
parameters, as well as (starting with PostgreSQL 9.6) dynamically adjusted on
the basis of the moving average of the write load sustained.

We can however activate an additional functionality, known as "WAL
archiving". The idea is that before recycling a WAL segment, we get the 
server to make a copy of
it on a separate volume for archival purposes. The resulting set of
archived WAL segments enables us to *perform point-in-time-recovery* 
operations - 
for example to restore the database as it was *20 minutes ago* - or as far
back as our archived journal allows us, starting with the last "base
backup". Additionally, WAL archiving is required to set up replication
towards a standby server, as we will see a little later.

## Let's do it
In the following, we will show how to enable WAL archiving. First, we will need
to use a new version of our `postgresql.conf`, modified as follows:

```
$ diff postgresql-default.conf postgresql-archiving.conf
178a179
> wal_level = replica
216a218
> archive_mode = on
220a223
> archive_command = 'test ! -f /archive/%f && cp %p /archive/%f'
234a238
> max_wal_senders = 3
```

- The `wal_level` defaults to `minimal`, which is sufficient for normal 
stand-alone operation, but we must set it to `replica` to include extra 
information in the WAL logs necessary for the archived files to be usable.
- `archive_mode` must be set to `on`
- `archive_command` is set to a shell command that will copy a WAL logfile 
`%p` to the archival volume, with the filename `%f`. Our archive volume will 
be mounted under `/archive`.
- Setting a certain number of `wal_senders` will be needed later to run 
`pg_basebackup` while in online mode. The `pg_basebackup` tool is the backup 
utility of choice for take a file-level snapshot of the PGDATA area, which 
will be required to initialize a standby server later.
  
As we now have a new `postgresql.conf` to use, we need to update our 
Dockerfile as follows:

> `postgresql-archiving.dockerfile`
```yaml
FROM postgres:9.6
RUN apt-get update && apt-get -y upgrade
RUN apt-get -y install vim less
RUN (echo "alias 'l=ls -l'" && echo "shopt -s autocd") >> /etc/bash.bashrc
ENV PGUSER=postgres
COPY postgresql-archiving.conf /etc/postgresql/postgresql.conf
RUN mkdir /archive && chown postgres /archive
CMD ["postgres", "-c", "config_file=/etc/postgresql/postgresql.conf"]
```
Notice that we also needed to create the `/archive` mount point so that we can
 set it owned by user `postgres`, as it will need to write there.

Creating the volume and making it available to our container at the mount 
points we want can be done by simply declaring it in a slightly modified 
docker-compose file:

>`docker-compose-archiving.yaml`
```yaml
version: '3'
services:
  primary:
    hostname: primary
    container_name: primary
    image: primary
    build:
      dockerfile: postgresql-archiving.dockerfile
      context: .
    volumes:
      - vol-primary:/var/lib/postgresql/data
      - vol-archive:/archive
volumes:
  vol-primary:
  vol-archive:
```

## Spin it

Time to rebuild our container image and run it. First terminate any 
containers that may be
 still running since going through the previous step with:
 ```yaml
 docker-compose -f docker-compose-default.yaml down
 ```
 And then build and launch the new one with:
```yaml
docker-compose -f docker-compose-archiving.yaml up --build -d
```

Next we will monitor the contents of our new `/archive` volume while loading 
some data in our server.

```bash
docker exec -it primary watch -n1 ls -l /archive
```

Keep this window visible. Now open another terminal window, `cd` in our work 
directory, and run:
```bash
gzcat stuff.sql.gz | docker exec -i primary psql -q
```

This command will create a new database and insert about 4.1 million rows, 
quickly generating a bunch of WAL segments. You should be able to observe them 
being copied to your new archive volume while the job runs. If so, 
congratulations - WAL archiving is active!

Prev: [Run single PostgreSQL with stock configuration](docs/01.md) Next: 
[Fun with PITR](docs/03.md) 