# Fun with PITR

In this step we will execute a base backup of our PostgreSQL instance and then
take advantage of our WAL archiving strategy to achieve point-in-time-restore
capabilities. The idea is to take these base backups at regular intervals - 
typically daily - and then use the latest base backup together with any 
WAL files archived since to restore the database to a specific point in time.

## Base backups

The `pg_basebackup` utility is able to create a valid mirror of the data files 
used by the database server _while the server is running_. A simple 
file-level copy of the 
contents of PGDATA would not result in a consistent mirror if the server is 
running, because these 
files are typically changing all the time. The `pg_basebackup` tool instead 
uses the _replication protocol_ built into PostgreSQL to obtain a snapshot 
guaranteed 
to be complete and consistent. Such a snapshot could be used to quickly 
activate another instance on a separate host - faster than restoring a full SQL dump 
made using `pg_dumpall`. Restoring a base backup is a simple matter of 
copying it over to the PGDATA directory of another server before starting it.

We can keep using the `postgresql-archiving.conf` we already have, but we do 
need to enable local connections for the _postgres_ user employing the 
replication protocol for `pg_basebackup` to work. For that the `pg_hba.conf` 
used by
 the 
server must 
contain the following lines:
 ```bash
# Allow replication connections from localhost, by a user with the
# replication privilege.
local   replication     postgres                                trust
host    replication     postgres        127.0.0.1/32            trust
host    replication     postgres        ::1/128                 trust
```
 
We are also going to need a new mount point for the volume that will be 
holding our backups, with the appropriate permissions. This all translates 
into our next Dockerfile `postgresql-pitr.dockerfile`:

```dockerfile
FROM postgres:9.6
RUN apt-get update && apt-get -y upgrade
RUN apt-get -y install vim less
RUN (echo "alias 'l=ls -l'" && echo "shopt -s autocd") >> /etc/bash.bashrc
ENV PGUSER=postgres
COPY postgresql-archiving.conf /etc/postgresql/postgresql.conf
COPY pg_hba.conf /etc/postgresql/pg_hba.conf
RUN mkdir /archive && chown postgres /archive
RUN mkdir /backup && chown postgres /backup
CMD ["postgres", "-c", "config_file=/etc/postgresql/postgresql.conf", "-c", "hba_file=/etc/postgresql/pg_hba.conf"]
```

The new backup volume will be managed by `docker-compose` using the 
following file `docker-compose-pitr.yaml`:

```yaml
version: '3'
services:
  primary:
    hostname: primary
    container_name: primary
    image: primary
    build:
      dockerfile: postgresql-pitr.dockerfile
      context: .
    volumes:
      - vol-primary:/var/lib/postgresql/data
      - vol-archive:/archive
      - vol-backup:/backup
volumes:
  vol-primary:
  vol-archive:
  vol-backup:

```
## Run the stack
Bring down the container stack we set up in the previous step, removing all 
associated volumes:

```bash
docker-compose -f docker-compose-archiving.yaml down -v
```   

Now bring up our new instance, with WAL archiving, backup volume mount and 
replicated connectivity enabled:

```bash
docker-compose -f docker-compose-pitr.yaml up --build -d
```   

Open a shell within the container with `docker exec -it primary bash` and 
verify that the directories `/archive` and `/backup` are there and owned by 
user `postgres`. You should be able to connect with `psql`, create databases 
etc.

## Store some data and back it up

First, we are going to reload the data we previously inserted while testing WAL 
archiving, then we'll run `pg_basebackup` to take a snapshot of the PGDATA contents.  
```bash
gzcat stuff.sql.gz | docker exec -i primary psql -q
docker exec primary pg_basebackup -D /backup -F tar -z -R -c fast -P 
```

This will create a compressed backup in our new backup volume, which you can 
look at with `docker exec primary ls -l /backup`.

## Create a new table and insert some rows
```bash
cat <<EOF
create table bar (

```